---
layout: post
title:  "Get going on your own DNS server with DNSMASQ"
date:   2016-08-31 16:15:04 +0100
categories: tutorial
author: Nathaniel
---


I migrated my home network away from BT as our DNS provider and the home hub as our DNS/DCHP provider. I chose to run this myself I can use a domain internally for devices on my network, for instance to get to my PLEX server I could just type https://mydomain.com/web to access PLEX instead of having to remember http://192.168.1.226/web each time I want to connect.

*What is DNS* - DNS is the server which translates a domain (i.e. google.co.uk) into the IP where the site is hosted (i.e: 216.58.210.35)

*What is DCHP* - DCHP is a server (usually run within your local network) and assigns each of the devices on your network (such as phones and computers) and IP within a defined range, for instance assigning a computer the IP 192.168.1.25 if the range is set to '192.168.1.1-192.168.1.25'

* Install DNSMASQ using the command `sudo apt-get install DNSmasq`

* Jump straight into /etc/dnsmasq.conf to change settings. Use `sudo nano /etc/dnsmasq.conf` (if you like nano), you can delete all the contents of the file and replace it all with the following:


{% highlight bash %}

# Never forward plain names (without a dot or domain part)
domain-needed


# Add local-only domains here, queries in these domains are answered from /etc/hosts or DHCP only.
local=/mydomain.uk/

# Makes this DNS server assert itself on your network as the main DNS server
dhcp-authoritative

# Main range for the DCHP server
dhcp-range=192.168.1.0,192.168.1.24,7d
# Set the domain for dnsmasq. this is optional. It's pretty cool (i.e you can view your computers webpage at my-pc.mydomain.uk instead of 192.168.1.159)
domain=mydomain.uk

# Second range for the guest DCHP server, if you want a second range
dhcp-range=192.168.2.0,192.168.2.24,7d
# Set a different domain for a the guest subnet (above)
domain=guest.readn.uk,192.168.2.0/24


# Here are our two upstream DNS' (Google DNS) , if one fails we'll fall back to the other
server=8.8.8.8
server=8.8.4.4

{% endhighlight %}

* Save your settings and do CTRL + X, Y, ENTER

* Want to add some internal domains? Edit /etc/hosts, add everything in the following form:

{% highlight bash %}

192.168.1.35    mydomain.uk
192.168.1.33    ns.mydomain.uk
192.168.1.56    printer.mydomain.uk

{% endhighlight %}

* Update your DNS server running `sudo service dnsmasq restart`, subsequently you can just reload DNSmasq using 'sudo service dnsmasq reload'

* To check your leases assigned, open /var/lib/misc/dnsmasq.leases and all assigned leases will be shown in this form. Client ID is often left as an asterik and can be ignored. The expiration date of the lease is in seconds since the UNIX epoch (can be converted to a normal date [here](http://www.epochconverter.com/): )

{% highlight bash %}

UNIX-EXPIRE MAC-ADDRESS IP-ASSIGNED HOSTNAME CLIENT-ID
1473120067 c8:69:cd:b3:66:fg 192.168.1.7 An-iPad *
1473219872 a4:77:33:tt:5d:89 192.168.1.12 Chromecast *

{% endhighlight %}

7. That's you running with DNSmasq, any issues just send us an email! For further features there are good guides [here](http://www.thekelleys.org.uk/dnsmasq/docs/dnsmasq-man.html) and [here](http://blogging.dragon.org.uk/howto-setup-dnsmasq-as-dns-dhcp/)

